You and I make a lot of decisions every day.
Now, some have a little impact on our lives;
others have a very big impact.
And we can appreciate that we can make
choices and decisions for ourselves.
Think of how life would be
if you made no decisions for yourself
—someone tells you when to go to bed,
they pick out your clothes,
and they tell you what to do for work.
Well, none of us would like that!
Jehovah gave each of us free will,
and that’s the precious gift
of making choices for ourselves.
Now, have you ever thought
about why Jehovah gave us this gift?
I mean, why trust us with free will
when he knew that we could make
bad choices or decisions?
Well, one powerful reason is love.
The only way to give us the gift of love
is also to give us the gift of free will.
The two are tied together.
You really can’t have one without the other.
For example, if I programmed my computer
to give me a message every day at 2:00 p.m.:
“John, I love you.
I think you’re a wonderful guy,”
I think there’d be
a little something wrong with me
if I thought: ‘Aw, isn’t that nice?
My computer, it loves me.’
Yeah, love only exists
if it comes truly
from a free-will expression.
Now, did Jehovah place any boundaries
on free will?
Yes.
They were stated in the Law
to the nation of Israel.
And Jesus later repeated them
at Matthew 22:37-40:
“He said to him:
‘“You must love Jehovah your God
“‘“with your whole heart
and with your whole soul
“‘and with your whole mind.”
“‘This is the greatest and first commandment.
“‘The second, like it, is this:
“‘“You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
“‘On these two commandments
the whole Law hangs,
and the Prophets.’”
So our use of free will
has love of God and love of neighbor
as its boundaries.
Notice, for example, what people are doing
in this picture,
both inside the circle boundary
and outside.
See, free will allows us
to do any of the things
we see in the picture.
But love of God and love of neighbor
move us to reject what’s outside the circle
and choose to do the kinds of things
that we see inside the circle.
Now, to stay within those boundaries,
Jehovah gave us a marvelous brain
and a built-in conscience,
but he also knows we need more help.
And that’s why he also gave us
Bible principles
—basic truths from the Bible
that can help us to make good decisions.
And it can safely be said
that any decision we face
can be guided by Bible principles.
Now, our Creator, Jehovah,
knows what’s best for us.
And he also trusts us to make decisions
based on Bible principles
because he knows that when we do that,
then we’re really, truly going to be happy,
content,
and at peace with him and with others.
So in review so far:
Jehovah gave us free will
—that’s the privilege
to make choices for ourselves—
and he also gave us Bible principles
as the boundaries to our choices.
But making difficult decisions requires
that we train ourselves
to recognize Bible principles and apply them.
Now let’s read Romans 12:1,
and let’s see how this verse describes
the decision-making process.
“Therefore, I appeal to you
“by the compassions of God, brothers,
“to present your bodies
as a living sacrifice,
“holy and acceptable to God,
“a sacred service
with your power of reason.”
So are we using our “power of reason”
to understand Bible principles?
For example, young children
ask lots of questions.
But has a child ever asked you:
“What happens when I drop a ball?
a pencil? a book?”
No, they don’t ask that.
They know what happens to anything they drop.
It falls down!
See, the child doesn’t need rules
for every object
but has quickly grasped the principle.
Anything he drops falls down.
Now, what if an 18-year-old asked you,
“What’s going to happen
when I drop this pen?”
Well, it’s obvious
he’s not been paying attention
to basic principles of life.
So by us paying attention
to Bible principles,
we can very quickly see the pattern
of love of God and love of neighbor
and know the right thing to do
without a long list of rules
for every situation.
Well, how can we train our “power of reason”?
We train it by paying attention
as we read and study the Bible.
Now, we don’t need rules
for which movies to watch,
which songs to listen to,
or what clothes we can wear.
If we’re paying attention
when we’re reading the Bible,
we train our conscience with Bible principles
so we can make such decisions
without needing a long list of rules.